SemVer is a set of rules and requirements that dictate how version numbers are created and assigned to their specific version. They are not universally binding, meaning you technically do not have to follow them, but following them is highly recommended. The general way SemVer works is that you have a major, minor, and patch number, organized like this: Major.Minor.Patch. For instance, 1.3.4, would mean it is in the major version of 1, minor version of 3, and patch version 4. The rules behind incrementing each number is that you should generally increment the patch version when you make minor bug fixes that are backwards compatible, you should increment the minor version when you add backwards compatible functionality, and you should increment the major version when you make incompatible API changes.

SemVer was created because imagine if everyone used their own way to establish version numbers. That makes it incredibly difficult to ascertain which dependencies you will need to update and roll out to users, and it would also be incredibly frustrating to successfully collaborate with other developers. As such, SemVer provides some semblance of order and coherence to the mess. That’s why it is also popular among many developers.

The twiddle-wakka is this operation: ~>. It is a shortcut that is available to RubyGems. I am unsure if it is unique to Ruby or if other languages use a similar shortcut. It effectively allows developers to specify what lower and upper bound of a dependency is compatible with their gem. (I think). For instance if I wrote ~> 1.3, that means any version above or equal to 1.3 and up to but excluding 2 will be installed when you run gem install. As such, it allows all versions within that degree of accuracy. What I mean by that is that since we have two specified numbers in the example: 1 and 3 making up 1.3, then it allows all versions through that degree of accuracy of two numbers. So all numbers 1.3 onwards, but up until 2.0. If I had specified three numbers, such as 1.3.4, it would allow everything up until 1.4.

I thought learning about SemVer was pretty interesting. Growing up my family had a family iMac, and I remember hearing all about the new OS X updates as they came out, so I remember reading about Leopard, Snow Leopard etc, so it’s interesting that the numbers aren’t meaningless. I always imagined there was some meaning to it, but I didn’t know that was how they decided to number things. Granted, it is possible that the numbers weren’t SemVer, but it’s nice to see the principles behind it in practice. Another place I can imagine it is in video games. I like playing video games, and growing up I used to play Minecraft and would see the versions as they came out, like Minecraft Beta 1.4 or something like that. So again, it’s nice to see the ideas in practice. One question I did have is: Why does Ruby used a modified version of SemVer? SemVer seems to be perfectly adequate for Ruby’s purpose, at least to my eyes, so I don’t understand why they would take the effort and inconvenience to modify SemVer when they could just use SemVer as is. Though I am probably mistaken lol.

Thanks for reading my reflection! It is a bit rambly because I wanted my reflection to reflect slightly the way I think, so it’s more of a recollection of what I think of off the top of my head when discussing SemVer. If you would like me to make it more formal please let me know!
